# 1. Family, Home, Relavives, My daily programme

## Osnova:

* Where do I live? With who? 
  * House X flat advantages/disadvantages
  * Rooms in your house
  * Your own room
  * Surroundings (garden)
  * Do I like this place
  * Living in the city X living in the country
  * My future living / My dream living
* Every family member
  * Basic info (name, look, age, etc.)
  * Job
  * Hobbies 
* Distant family – relatives
* Things we do together, have in common  
* My future family plans
  * Ideal partner
  * Kids


### Významný slovíčka: 
Takový ty špeky, který po tobě bude Prochásková stopro chtít

* Housing
  * attic - podkroví
  * bungalow - přízemní dům
  * chimney - komín
  * detached house - samostatný rodinný domek  
  * semi-detached house - dvojdomek 
  * doorstep - práh
  * live in lodgings - žít v pronájmu
  * outskirts - okraj města
  * suburbs - předměstí
  * terraced house - řadový domek 

* Family
  * bride - nevěsta
  * bridegroom - ženich
  * illegitimate child - nemanželské dítě
  * niece - neteř
  * row - hádka
  * split up - rozejít se
  * spoiled - rozmazlený 
  * unfaithful - nevěrný

## Příklad řeči:

(Osobně mi víc sedí nejdřív mluvit o rodině a pak až popisovat barák, takže jsem v příkladu řeči prohodil body 1 a 2 z osnovy)

### 1. Family/Home: 
I live with my family in a big semi-detached house in a suburb of Olomouc called Hodolany. 
Members of my family are father Jiří, mother Petra, and younger brother Tomáš. 

My father is 47 years old. He works as the head of the Olomouc branch of engineering company HBH. This company is making projects of roads, highways, and bridges all around the Czech republic. 
He is pretty slim and tall because he lost a lot of weight last year. He has dark hair and wears glasses. My father likes watching sports and riding a bike. 
  
My mother is 45 years old. She works in a kindergarten. She is short with short dark hair. She likes spending time with her friends. 

My brother is 15 years old. He is tall as me and he's slim. He wears glasses. Same as father. His favorite activities are playing games with friends and riding a bike.  

Our family house consists of 5 rooms and connecting corridor. On the left side of the corridor are 2 doors. The first door leads to my and my brother's room. Our room is quite large. It has 
2 beds, 2 work desks with computers a TV and a bunch of wardrobes. 
The second room is my paren's bedroom which consists of a bed, wardrobes, and TV. 
On the right side of the corridor are also 2 doors. The second doors are from the toilet and the first leads to the living room. The living room is then connected to the kitchen and bathroom.
At the end of the corridor is one more door which leads to a garden.

### 2. My daily programme:
I try to manage my day by holding to the morning routine and planning activities the day before. I set my alarm clock for the next day to have around 8 hours of sleep. I usually wake up between the 6th to the 7th hour. I drink a glass of water and brush my teeth. Then I will spend some time stretching and doing some meditation or Wim hof method exercises. After this, I take a shower. In the last 2 minutes of the shower, I turn the temperature to cold to get some morning boost from the cold. The last thing in my mourning routine is breakfast. I usually make 3 scrambled eggs and put them into a tortilla. I also take my morning vitamins with breakfast. This morning routine is the same nearly all of my days. 

My other daily activities depend on my plans. In the morning I usually spend time in school, work or by working on some project. 
In the afternoon after work or school, I usually go to the gym. After the gym, I try to attend some socializing events or work on my hobbies which include for example learning guitar, reading philosophical and psychological books. 

In the evening, I do my bedtime stretching and go to sleep usually between the 10th and 11th hour. 

## Příklad řeči 2:
### Family/house
* I live with my family in a semi-detached house in outskirts of the city Uničov. In front of a house we have quite big yard with 3 garages and veranda. First garage is for car, second for bicycles and other garden tools and third is workshop. Behind the backyard is our garden where we grow various vegetables. There is also a small greenhouse and couple of fruit trees.
* When you enter through the door from the backyard you enter the hall. From there you can go left to the bathroom. To the right is the entrance to the living room. In the middle of that there is small separate toilet with boiler. Main and the biggest room is a living room which is connected to the kitchen with a large family table. From living room there is door that leads to brother's room and my room. From dining room there are stairs to big parent's room and attick. We have 2 cellars. The first is under the stairs the second is in the garden.
* My room isn't big so I have bunk bed under which is a large table where I keep my things. When you come on the right there is that bed. In front of you there is window and a comfortable armchair. On the left there is big closet for all my clothes.
...
ez téma

### Specific tast:
Your grandma was given a new mobile phone. Explain her how to use it in a simple way.

* best type of phone for grandma
* hardware basics
* basic info about SIM card - telephoning, writing massages
* aware of scammers, fake wins etc.

## Příklad řeči:     
* The first thing we need to deal with is a type of phone. Because of constantly evolving technologies and features we should search for the simplest phone. The older push-button phones are ideal but nowadays are not as common as smartphones. I think that most cell phone stores have a phone section for seniors. These phones are usually solid and they are designed mainly for calling and writing messages.
* Then you should set up the phone. Turn off some functions that are unnecessary for grandparents and would only confuse them. Mostly you turn off internet data or internet by itself (depends if grandparent will use the internet). Additionally, you can add a sim card with credit and set up a few basic contacts, except contacts to family, you can also add a contact for their doctor, ambulance, police, etc.
* We start showing our grandparents control over the phone. How they can turn on/off the phone, how the buttons work, sound settings, menu navigation to contacts, etc.
* Just like anywhere there are people who want to abuse someone's ignorance. Grandparents are an easy target for them. They can be easily scammed. These scam calls are usually masked by various actions of the interesting offer type but in reality, it is usually something cheap that is very expensive. It can be also some variety of services. We should tell our grandparents to be careful when calling with unknown numbers