# 2. Leisure Time, Hobbies. Sports and Games

## Osnova:

* Leisure time, hobbies
  * Why, when people do hobbies
  * Diff between men's and women's hobbies
  * Typical hobbies for men and women
  * How can culture help us to relax
  * Examples of hobbies (computers, fAsHiON, reading, collecting, music)
  * My favourite hobbies
  
* Sports and games
  * Why people do sports
  * indoor/outdoor sports
  * summer/winder sports
  * when, where do we practise sports
  * PE lessons
  * favourite sports
  * individual/collective, active/passive
  * Olimpic games/championship

### Významná slovíčka:
* handwork - ruční práce 
* knitting - pletení 
* sewing - šití 
* widespread - rozšířený
* competition - soutěž 
* leisure time - volný čas 
* trainers - tenisky

## Příklad řeči:
We usually have time for our hobbies after work or school. Everyone have some kind of hobbies, some can play some sport like football, ice hockey, ext. Another one can like cars, or play videogames. Some hobbies are very time or money expensive. Some hobbies can be dangerous. Some can be stupid for other people. Hobbies help us relax and we do them for fun. I don’t think that we should criticize other people hobbies.

I think there are huge differences between men´s and women´s hobbies. Men are usually more technical and active so they love sports, cars, computers, tech and more. Women prefer hobbies that allow them to sit down and relax, such as knitting, sewing or reading books. But you can find man that like reading books, knitting or working in garden. Same you can find woman that like cars, tech and other things. But as I said, we should criticize other people hobbies, let everyone do what they like.

Very common hobby is reading. Some people read books, newspapers, news on internet, magazines, comics and more. I think reading is very good for us.

A hobby that used to be favored more by women but is now gaining more popularity among men is fashion. Everyone want to be trendy. They feel more attractive in new clothes. But some people really don’t care about their look. 

Sports are one of the most popular activity, nowadays more and more people start to do something. Many people like running, some playing football, ice hockey. Other like cycling and more.

We can divide sports into two categories by where they are practised. First is indoor sports, this include gymnastics, table tennis, boxing, handball, floorball and more. Second is outdoor sports, this include running, cycling, skiing, hiking. But most sports and almost all games can be done both indoors and outdoors.

In CZ we also do sports at school. We usually have two Pes a week. When the weather is good, we go outside to play games like football, volleyball or basketball. Sometimes we practice for athletic events – running, jumping, throwing.

The most popular sports in the CZ are football and ice-hockey. In GB, rowing, cricket and polo. In the USA – American football, baseball, basketball and ice-hockey.

Olympic games have long tradition in world. First games took place in ancient Greece in year 776 B.C. First modern Olympic games took place in Olympia in 1896. One the best from each country can compete in Olympic games every 4 years and it is biggest sports event in the world. 
### Specific task:
Tell us about outdoors observation hobbies as geocaching, satellite watching and others that are popular nowadays.

* Intro
* How its work
* Geocache boxes
* Satellite watching
* Own experience
* AD of geocaching

## Příklad řeči:
* Geocaching is the world's largest treasure hunt. The high-tech treasure hunt combines GPS tracking with outdoor adventure.There are more than three million geocaches hidden all around the world in parks and trails. 
* In fact, there are probably some near you as you're reading this. But finding the GPS coordinates is only half the game. First, you have to find the box.
* Geocache boxes come in all different shapes and sizes. It can be anything, but it's usually a small metal, wooden, or plastic box that can withstand the elements. It might be a camouflaged.
* Satellite watching is a hobby which consists of the observation and tracking of artificial satellites that are orbiting earth. Since satellites outside Earth’s shadow reflect sunlight, those especially in low Earth orbit may visibly glint as they traverse the observer's sky, usually during twilight.
* When i was younger, i tried geocaching.Its funny and something like adventure. I think it´s better then sitting at home and playing computer games.
* The best things on geocaching and satelite watching are immunity boosts, less stress, improves memory, boosts mental health ,gets you moving and reduce symptoms of depression
