# 3. Culture and the Arts. My Bookcase. My Favourite British or American Author

## Osnova:

* What does the culture represent to society
  * Source of knowledge, education, experience, fun
  * Tradition
* Parts of culture
  * books
  * movies
  * music
  * philosophy and religions 
* My Bookcase
  * How often do I read
  * What books do I have 
  * Buy or borrow in a library
  * favorite genre 
  * favorite author
* My favorite Actor
  * Role model
  * His/her appearance
  * His/her movies

### V칳znamn치 slov칤캜ka:

* novel - rom치n 
* short story - pov칤dka
* fine art - v칳tvarn칠 um캩n칤 
* genre - 쮂멽r 
* volume - d칤l/svazek 
* strophes - sloky

## P콏칤klad 콏e캜i:
* Culture - is the characteristics and knowledge of a particular group of people. These groups we can in general divide according to states and their language, religion, cuisine, social habits, music, and arts.

The traditional part of culture is literature. We divide literature into two parts - poetry and prose. The most typical form of prose are novels and short stories. In a novel, there is usually one main any many side stories. Novels are mostly written in books. Parts of novels can be divided into volumes and chapters. 
Poems are usually much shorter than novels. They are structures in strophes. Poems are versificated with the usage of rhymes for most of the time. 
Works such as movies, and music are also an important part of the culture and art. Nowadays they are an even more preferable source of knowledge, education, and fun than literature for a lot of people. 

There also exists a combination of both worlds which are audiobooks. Audiobooks are books converted to listenable form so the consumer can do other tasks while listening to the book.

I consider myself somewhere between as I both like books and movies as a source of entertainment. I also listen to music on nearly every occasion when it's possible. To obtain information and learn new things I both watch videos and listen to the podcast on the certain topic and read books about the topic.

The older I get the more I read non-fiction and serious books than fun fiction. Nowadays my bookcase consists of most topics like ancient Greece philosophy, western psychology, and business books. 
When it comes to fiction my favorite author is Francis Scott Fitzgerald with such novels as The Great Gatsby or Tender is the Night. He was an American author that was part of the Lost generation. His stories took place in the so-called Jazz age. 
 
From the movie sphere, I like movies with Hugh Jackman, Leonardo DiCaprio, or Zack Efron. I also like movies made by marvel which are all part of the same cinematic universe which is made according to the template made by marvel comic books.

As I said earlier I am a huge consumer of music. I listen to it every day for many hours. My favorite genre is pop-punk but I have my favorites and many more genres. 

Besides consuming art and culture, people can create their own by writing books, songs, painting, and so on. 

### 游:
* About me and culture - I used to watch quite a lot of series and movies. Mostly, the films fascinated me according to the theme and not by actors. My favourite genres were sci-fi and fantasy. Over time, more realistic genres and post-apocalypse. Nowadays I barely watch films or series.      
About books - In past, I haven't read that much in the past, but that quite changed during high school. I started with simple novels with fantasy or post-apocalyptic genre (for example series Metro by Dmitrij Glukhovsky or Witcher by Andrzej Sapkowski). Then I got through to "classical" literature bcs of literature in school. But these books most of the time didn't fit me. The most I liked from there Karel 캛apek. After this period, I started reading more about psychology and more complicated topics (for example Mark Manson or Friedrich Nietzche).     
About Music - I listen to music almost constantly because of commuting. I use Spotify. And I listen to a very wide range of genres. I like the most Industrial metal/rock, nu-metal, rock, indie and so on. I don't especially like trendy music because they lack rhythm or have a primitive meaning. Especially pop and rap.

### Kdyby ta p칤캜a cht캩la sv치tky, tak jak n치s jebala v hodin치ch:
* CZ:
  * 28th october - Czechoslovakia
  * 8th may - end of WW2
  * 28th september - dead of prince Wenceslav
  * 17th november - velvet revolution
* UK:
  * 14th february - St. Valentine day
  * 17th march - St. Patrick's day
  * 5th november - unsuccessful try to blow up parlament
* US:
  * 4th monday of May - memorial day of victims of the war
  * 4th july - the independence day 
  * 4th thursday in November - thanksgiving

* 30th october - Halloween


### Specific task:
Name some modern devices that enable people to enjoy live cultural performances at home.

* Culture
* Culture during pandemy
* Radio
* TV
* Internet culture

## P콏칤klad 콏e캜i:
* Culture during a pandemic - during the pandemic, people are advised to stay at home so they can't experience cultural events as they used to be because most of these events were canceled or banned by governments. Considering the lack of cultural life many people nowadays have problem with a free time while being at home. That's why there is a new type of "electronic" culture. Still, it isn't comparable to a live experience, basically, you just sit or do some housework and listen or watch tv or videos from the internet. 
* Radio - one of the older options is listening to the radio. This technology is based on radio waves. The first practical radio was developed in 1895. And began to be used commercially around 1900. From the point of view of history, Radio is a really important discovery. The biggest boom that radios had was during world wars, where they were more efficient than letter delivery. Nowadays it's still a great source of news, weather reports, sports information, and music. Radios are mostly listened to in cars while driving.
* TV - Televisions were publicly used after WW2. Their advantage over the radio is the visual aspect, which affects people a lot more than just sound. Like the radio invention of the television was a world changer. Now television has become an axiom of the whole culture that everybody has at home. The evolution of television began with analog, then digital and now there are smart TVs with are a hybrid between standard dialogue tv and the internet. On television we can watch the news, series, movies, music videos, shows on specific topics, documentaries. Every aspect of the culture.
* Internet culture - the newest option is the internet culture. The biggest advantage is that, unlike television and radio, that you do not have to watch the program of the stations and you can simply search on your device with the internet connection and watch what you like (mostly pc, mobile phone or smart tv). You don't have to wait for the station to start broadcasting your favorite show. Another great advantage is social media, where you can share your ideas, opinions, favorite films, serials, and images and you can discuss with other users.