# 4. Housing

## Osnova:

* The place where I live
* house x flat
* surroundings of the house
* describe each room
* descibe your own room
* living in city x suburb x village (AD x DIS)
* my place (AD x DIS)

### Významná slovíčka:
* Housing
  * attic - podkroví
  * bungalow - přízemní dům
  * chimney - komín
  * detached house - samostatný rodinný domek  
  * semi-detached house - dvojdomek 
  * doorstep - práh
  * live in lodgings - žít v pronájmu
  * outskirts - okraj města
  * suburbs - předměstí
  * terraced house - řadový domek 


## Příklad řeči:
I live with my family in a semi-detached house in a suburb of Olomouc called Hodolany. 

Our family house consists of 5 rooms and connecting corridor. On the left side of the corridor are 2 doors. The first door leads to my and my brother's room. Our room is quite large. It has 
2 beds, 2 work desks with computers a TV and a bunch of wardrobes. In the wardrobes, we have both clothes, electronic devices, and accessories. Under my brother's bed, there is also a stash where we keep our equipments for sports such as handball shoes and balls, jumping ropes weighted west, and so on.  

The second room is my paren's bedroom which consists of a bed, wardrobes, and TV. The parent's room is by guess two times smaller than my and my brother's room.
 
On the right side of the corridor are also 2 doors. The second doors are from the toilet and the first leads to the living room. In the living room, we have a sofa, TV, table and two armchairs. The living room is a nice place for relaxation or activities such as reading. The living room is then connected to the kitchen and bathroom. Both kitchen and bathroom are quite usually rooms with typical useful equipment.

At the end of the corridor is one more door which leads to a garden. In the garden, we grow two apple trees, raspberries, and blackberries. In the summer it is a nice place for relaxation. 

The location of our house is great. It is both close to the city and calm. 

In the future, I would like to live in a big flat close to the center of the city although I'm still not quite sure which city it would be I would like it to be a bigger city because it provides a better job and socializing opportunities. With regard to which country I would choose to live in, I'm not binding to just the Czech republic. Actually, I think there are many more interesting and better countries to live in. 
I'm not excited about living in a country. For me, it's too far from everyday life and for me, it's too big a price for a usually bigger house and calmer surroundings. 

Although I don't want to live in a country I would love to enjoy some of both worlds. If possible I would like to buy some hut in a country where I could recharge myself from time to time. 

My ultimate living goal is to buy an island with a few of my friends to live on. On the island, we would have our small village with everything we would need. In the village, there will be a big gym with many huts to live in. To keep contact with the rest of the world we would have a small airport with private jet or docks with some yacht or even both. 
I know that this plan sounds crazy but I'm sure that it's 100% possible. 

### 👀:
* I live with my family in a semi-detached house on the outskirt of the city Uničov. In front of a house, we have a quite big yard with 3 garages and veranda. The first garage is for car, the second for bicycles and other garden tools and the third is for the workshop. Behind the backyard is our garden where we grow various vegetables. There is also a small greenhouse and a couple of fruit trees.
* When you enter through the door from the backyard you enter the hall. In the Hall, there are various shoe boxes and wardrobes. From there you can go left to the bathroom where there are a washer, dryer, bathtub and sink with hygienic needs. 
In the middle of the hall, there is a small separate room with a toilet and boiler. Main and the biggest room is a living room which is connected to the kitchen with a large family table. From the living room, there is a door that leads to my brother's room and my room. There is a large couch with a coffee table and TV in the living room. There are also a few armchairs. Between the living room and kitchen, there is a dining room with a big family table. The kitchen has a wooden style and has everything you need. Large refrigerator with freezer, dishwasher, oven and so on. From the dining room, there are stairs to the big parent's room and attic. We have 2 cellars. The first is under the stairs the second is in the garden.
* My room isn't big so I have a bunk bed under which is a large table where I keep my things. When you come on the right there is that bed. In front of you, there is a window and a comfortable armchair. On the left, there is a big closet for all my clothes.

### Specific task:
Imagine you have just moved from your current home into your dream home – smart home. Give more details about your new home full of electronic gadgets.

* definition
* technology and how it works
* virtual assistens
* alarms

## Příklad řeči:
* Smart home is a type of house that uses smart devices to simplify the daily task. People use these devices to remotely control different aspects and actions in a house.  
* Smart home is a type of house that has highly advanced automatic systems for lighting, temperature control, fire alarm security, water appliances, and many other functions. Signals are sent through the home’s wiring to switches, displays, or controllers that are programmed to operate these systems and electronic devices in every part of the house. People then can set up different things in their houses. They can switch lights (sometimes even brightness or color), control temperature, lock/unlock doors, switch some smart devices like TV or radio. Many of these functions can be usually controlled through some kind of a mobile app. 
* Other devices can be controlled by voice. They are called virtual assistants. The topmost known is Amazon Alexa, Amazon Echo, or Apple HomePod. Through these devices, you can search for things on the internet and then watch them on your TV.
* Smart homes are usually very safe because of alarms. Mostly with fire alarm with water jets and security system against robbery with cameras or laser sensors. If sensors trigger some unusual movement they will alert the user or even turn on the audible alarm and call the police.
