# 5. Shopping and Services

## Osnova

* what does shopping mean for other people
* big malls/single shops
* specialized stores
* internet shopping X shopping centres
* saving money while shopping
* ways of paying
* marketplaces
* second hands
* loans and leasing
* international/national brands

### Významná slovíčka:
* antiques - starožitnosti 
* cashier - pokladní 
* change - drobné nazpět 
* consumer - spotřebitel 
* consumer electronics - spotřební elektronika 
* consumer goods - spotřební zboží 
* cut-price good - zlevněné zboží 
* dairy - mlékárna 
* grocer's - obchod s potravinami 

## Příklad řeči:
Shopping is necessary activity nowadays. We need to shop for food, clothes, gadgets, services and so on. For some people, shopping is even more than just a necessary activity. Someone can do shopping as a hobby or even can have a source of income from shopping and reselling stuff. 

When it comes to shopping in person, there are two types of people. The first group prefers to visit large shopping centers where they have everything in one place. In shopping centers is usually a supermarket and many specialized shops. The drawback for shopping centers being so practical and compact is the big concentration of people, especially in busy hours. The second group prefers to visit single specialized shops or supermarkets outside the shopping centers.

Always is better to buy special things like electronics or building materials in specialized shops. You can rely on quality and good service. Examples of specialized shops are sports shop like Sportisimo or Hervis. For furniture I think the most famous is Ikea.

A big topic nowadays is online shopping. We live in times when we can purchase online utterly everything. From clothes, through food to even cars or real estate. It is good to say that many things are still better to buy in person, such as clothes because you can try them on but on the other hand on the internet is a larger selection of clothes from which to choose. 

Smart people are trying to find ways to save money while shopping. The first and most obvious way to save is to buy just necessary things. Another way is to look for sales. The last way which I remember is to use some kind of cashback services. 

When you're buying groceries you need to decide how would you pay for them. There are few options. The first is to pay in cash. It's the oldest method. Nowadays it's pretty impractical because you need to carry cash with you. Another way is to pay by card. It's the most practical way of paying because you don't need to carry any cash with you. Nowadays you don't even need to carry a card with you. With services like apple or google pay you only need your smartphone with you. The most modern way of paying is with the usage of cryptocurrencies. Cryptocurrencies are great for international payments because they are not extra charged unlike payments in classic FIAT currencies. The only handicap for cryptocurrencies is that they are still young and not really adapted and transactions with some currencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum are subject to big fees to miners. The last way of paying is by service in the style of getting now and pay later. This kind of service allows you to pay for the product later but they usually have a big drawback that is some kind of fee so in final you will pay more than just a price of a product.  

For people who want to buy something very cheap there are marketplaces or second-hand shops. Clothes, shoes and other things are there very cheap but not of a good quality. Usually you will not find any known brands here and if so it's probably some kind of fake.

When you buy something very expensive (like a house or car), you can take a loan from a bank or you can use leasing. Leasing means that you only pay directly a part of the price and then the rest you pay monthly. With loans and leasing you pay some extra money on interest, but it gives you the possibility to buy things even though you would have to save for months.

In the shopping industry are occurring many well known international brands which are increasing price of their product just buy putting their brand on it. These kinds of products have usually some guaranteed quality and that's one of the reasons why there are almost cults around some brands, but I think the bigger reason is the brand's marketing which concentrates on creating great stories around products and feeling of exceptionality.  


### Specific tast:
How to secure the proces of payment?

Osnova: 
* Ways user can secure payment
* Ways developers of an app can secure payment
* How I pay on the internet
* Cryptocurrency 


### Příklad řeči:
* As a user. The most important part of securing payments is to not pay on unverified pages. It is also important to keep sensitive information safe like for example card PIN code. Another important part of a user’s safety paying is using two-phase verification which will rapidly improve the security of payments. 
* There is also an importance of well-done job by developers of certain service especially on the security of saving the user’s data. It is very hard to create a functional and safe payment gateway that would be approved by the necessary authorities. That’s why most of the developers cooperate with some third-party service that is specialized in payments and is already approved.  
* When I pay on the internet I usually use a service called Google pay, which has saved my card information or I use my card by itself. I use two-phase verification which means, that except for writing card information, or just clicking on a card in Google pay I also have to write a code from SMS or confirm payment in the banking app.
* Another new and very interesting way to secure payments is to use modern cryptocurrencies like bitcoin. Bitcoin is especially powerful when we would like to stay anonymous. Thanks to blockchain technology that saves data of all transactions bitcoin can’t be stolen if an owner behaves responsibly.  
