# 6. Food and Eating Out

## Osnova:

* describe daily meals (breakfast, lunch, dinner) CZ/GB/USA
* difference between these meals in CZ/GB/USA
* typical meals for CZ/GB/USA
* eating out X cooking at home
* definition of supper
* your daily diet
* favorite meals (cheat meals)
* your cooking skills
* experience from a cut (Love this 😅 M.)

### Významná slovíčka:
* beverages - nápoje
* cookbook - kuchařka 
* EGGS 
    * fried - smažená
    * hard boiled - na tvrdo
    * poached - ztracená
    * scrambled - míchaná
    * soft boiled - na měkko 
* MEAT 
    * beef - hovězí 
    * lamb - jehněčí
    * mutton - skopové 
    * pork - vepřové 
    * poultry - drůbež
    * veal - telecí
    

## Příklad řeči:

* Division of the meals

Majority of the population is dividing daily meals into 3 main courses, one of them being breakfast which is supposed to "break the fast" that body was going through during the night, the list continues with lunch at noon being considered one of the biggest meals of the day and ends with dinner in the evening as a preparation for already mentioned longer night time fast. All of them are usually interlaced with snacks of some sort to keep us satiated and our energy levels up during the meantime between those main meals. They may differ according to nationality though I´d say that when it comes to selection of a daily diet for an individual we need to be way more specific than that in order to determine the final form of the plan because of their natural responses to different allergens, their preferences, goals, schedules and so on.

* Czech daily meal structure

Some may say that the traditional meal in our country consists of a sugared hot beverage (tea, coffee) accompanied by a few rolls or slices of bread with sub-efficacious doses of protein given to our body from cheese or ham rather decorating its tops. Popular alternative being a non-satiating bowl of cereals providing a quick blast of low quality carbohydrates into your system in most cases resulting in a substantial energy decline afterwards. Moving to the lunch it is common for you to get served a soup with main course having a meat as a base complemented by a side dish in a canteen often times having depressingly small portions. With that induction of the need for a frequent "snacking" people tend to have less food for dinner itself. 

* English / USA daily meal structure

Average UK family supposedly breaks their fast similarly to us with the difference being the choice of pastry and beverages on the work days. Weekends are differentiated by the merge of the breakfast with lunch resulting into a meal called "brunch" that consists of a more satiating and macronutrient rich ingredients such as eggs, bacon, beans, tomatoes and mushrooms if not being just a generalised stereotype. Lighter lunches are apparently popular in these areas with the whole meal being as nutritiously unsatisfying and disappointing as it could be, a single sandwich or a salad. Finishing the day off with a four course dinner having a soup to start things off, leading to a main course followed by a dessert and a cheese or biscuits as the last course of the day. Occasionally they have one more very light meal called "supper".              

* Eating out X Cooking at home

One of the biggest pros of eating out is said to be time efficiency which I completely disagree with, you can prepare a quality satiating meal with basic cooking knowledge in no time. You can even prep those meals in advance at the end of each week to be more time efficient. Sadly many young people are lacking even that basic knowledge and after leaving their parents house they survive on fast food and junk. The only way I like to look at eating out is from a socializing or travelling standpoint. On the other hand cooking at home improves a important skill of yours, is generally cheaper and some would say healthier but the better description would be that you know exactly what goes into those meals and you can manage your daily calorie intake better.

* My diet

I am currently transitioning from a maintenance intake to a slight surplus of 3500 calories having usually around 6 meals a day. Starting off with breakfast having a lot of both simple and complex carbs alongside with protein, the next ones are usually post and pre workout meals while being the most macronutrient balanced, largest and best quality overall to support the protein synthesis induced by a resistance training. Meal number four is mainly simple carbs and fiber coming from fruits and vegetables with the addition of a protein shake. Then comes the next bigger meal of the day, in most cases eggs or cottage cheese with some pastry and veggies on the side. The last meal of the day is always some type of greek yoghurt and cheese. As you can see there are only few meals that require some serious cooking though it is really important to know the basics, it drains life power from me and leaves it an empty shell seeing people in their 20s struggle with something as basic as chicken and rice, myself being a mediocre chef I can still prepare every meal I have in my plan and even experiment with it which I think is crucial when it comes to "survival" cooking, nothing fancy but gets the job well done on the time spent and nutrition side of the spectrum. I would like to say that this diet may not work for everyone but it works for me perfectly and has helped me sustain a low percentage of body fat or bulk up only modifying the basic structure by changing the portion sizes.

* My diet BULK

My diet is determined by my somatype which is ectomorph. It's partly due to my genetics, but it's also due to my lifestyle. Specifically, I have been very active in sports since childhood. This affected my fat and carbs burning which is immediately converted into energy. So my body does not store these "materials" and I struggle to gain weight. I mentioned somatypes. There are 3 "main" categories. The first ectomorph that I've already mentioned. This type has very good fat and sugar burning soo this type is usually thin. Opposite of ectomorph is endomorph. This type has the opposite problem and that the body retains too many building materials. The third type is mesomorph what I think is an ideal type for building muscles. Back to my diet. Bcs I want to gain weight I have one simple to do. I must have more income than expenses. This means that I have to eat more calories than my body burns during the day. Meal 1 is always one whole curd with oatmeal and with something to taste (granko, honey or jam). The second meal depends on if I have a gym in the morning or afternoon. If in the morning I usually take some small carbs one banana with a protein bar. If a gym is in the afternoon I have my main meal sometime around 11 o'clock. In general, it is always a piece of meat with some side dish. The type of meat doesn't matter to me but mostly is chicken, pork but my favourite is beef. The side dishes are mostly potatoes or pasta but rice also appears to me often thanks to its simple preparation. After gym Ill take one shaker of gainer. Then meat three is usually is a couple of tasty sandwiches with butter, cheese, a lot of ham and tomatoes. Meal four is either a shaker of gainer again or simply a milk smoothie with banana and protein powder and oatmeal. Meal five contains eggs with bacon and bread. Meal six is bread with something usually some spread.

### Specific task:
Discuss with your teacher the technologies, that help to prepare or store food. What can you say about principles of work of such equipment as a fridge, cooker or microwave oven?

* food and eating out
* refrigerator
* microwave oven
* dishwasher
* robotics and machine
* 3D printing
* Problem with a growing population / cultured meat

## Příklad řeči:
* When it comes to food, technology isn't always the first thing that comes to mind. Nowadays however it's an important part of the food industry. Technology helps food manufacturers produce more efficiently for Earth’s growing population. There are more than 7 billion people in the world right now and the number is still growing which means higher demand for food each year. By using tech to improve processing and packing, it can improve the shelf life and safety of food.
* A refrigerator is a home appliance that transfers heat from its inside to its external environment so which means that inside is cooled to a temperature below the room temperature. Refrigeration is an essential food storage technique in the developed countries. The lower temperature lowers the reproduction rate of bacteria, so the refrigerator reduces the rate of spoilage. A refrigerator maintains a temperature a few degrees above the freezing point of water. A similar device that maintains a temperature below the freezing point of water is called a freezer. Their refrigerator replaced the icebox, which had been a common household appliance for almost a century and a half.
* A microwave oven is an electric oven that heats and cooks food by exposing it to electromagnetic radiation in the microwave frequency range. This induces polar molecules in the food to rotate and produce thermal energy in a process known as dielectric heating. Microwave ovens are a common kitchen appliance and are popular for reheating previously cooked foods and cooking a variety of foods. They rapidly heat food that can easily burn if cooked in conventional pans, such as butter, fats, chocolate, or porridge. Microwave oven shaves a limited role in professional cooking because the boiling range temperature of a microwave oven will not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying or baking at a higher temperature will.
* A dishwasher is a machine for cleaning dishes automatically. Unlike manual dishwashing, which relies largely on physical scrubbing to remove soiling, the mechanical dishwasher cleans by spraying hot water at the dishes. A mix of water and dishwasher detergent is pumped to one or more rotating spray arms, blasting the dishes with the cleaning mixture. The mixture is recirculated to save water and energy. Once the wash is finished, the water is drained, more hot water enters the tub and the sense cycles begin. When the rinsing is finished, the water is drained again and the dishes are dried using one of several drying methods. 
* The number of robots in the European food industry is well over 30,000. They help to ensure quality and affordability. By using machines, we can drive down the costs of keeping the food fresh. Robotic machines can also help to eliminate safety issues in the more dangerous food industry jobs. In 2016, a tech company rolled out a program for butchery. By using robots instead of people to cut the more difficult the meats they can save many work injuries. This is just one of the many ways technology can improve the industry.
* In the past few years, 3D printing has taken off across many industries and the food industry is one of them. There have been several applications of 3D printing food from NASA printing a pizza to creating soft foods for those who cannot chew. 
* To satisfy the increasing demand for food by the growing human population, cultured meat (also known as lab-grown meat) is presented as a good alternative for people who want to be more responsible but do not wish to change their diet. Cultured meat is made by painlessly harvesting muscle cells from a living animal and multiplying them to create muscle tissue, which is the main component of meat-eating. It is biologically the same as the meat tissue that comes from animals.
