# 7. Health and Diseases. Healthy Way of Life

## Osnova:

* definition of health
* various illnesses (now/before)
* importance of prevention
* alternative medicine
* visiting a doctor/dentist
* illnesses - common, serious, mortal
* specialists
* price of medical care in our country X in US
* insurance
* what can we do to be more healthy
* healthy lifestyle - exercise, diet, prevention

### Významná slovíčka:
* check-up - prohlídka 
* consulting room - ordinace
* flu - chřipka 
* general practicioner - obvodní doktor 
* influenza - chřipka 
* make an apointment with - objednat se u 

## Příklad řeči:

* Definition

The fact that health is the most important thing in our lives is known amongst people for ages though it is commonly considered a matter of course when the health state of an individual is stable and thus not being properly appreciated. It takes an encounter with serious illness for some people to realise the importance of the health and the proportional irrelevance of other problems in life in comparison to it.

* Prevention

The most convenient way to treat a problem is to prevent it from existing in the first place. This gives the whole prevention process a major role when it comes to health. It is recommended to undergo a regular check-up at least once a year at your local practitioner. You should know how to treat basic health issues such as high temperature, headache, sore throat,... so you don´t have to visit your doctor every time you feel little off. It is said that one should stay in bed, drink herbal tea and take prescribed medicine if the illness requires its use for the process of its treatment. Sub-optimal approach to the problem may result in dangerous aftereffects and prolongation of the illness itself.

* Visiting doctor/hospital

If we already know the issue might be more serious we should visit our local practitioner. After arriving to the building you need to wait in the waiting room for nurse to see your insurance card. When it is your turn you walk to the doctor´s office, they take your temperature, ask about the issue and examine your throat, sometimes they even check your blood pressure, take your pulse or blood count. Then the doctor diagnoses the case and prescribes you some medicine and therapy if necessary. When the issue is more serious you might need a special treatment in hospital, it may be for example heart attack, appendicitis, broken arm or leg, or even more serious diseases such as tuberculosis, pneumonia, leukaemia, diabetes,...

* Medical care

Most of the types of medical care are free of charge in our country not considering some private doctors. We pay for majority medicines though the hospital stays are free if you don´t have special demands such as a private room. Certain parts of our National Health Service might need a little bit of reorganisation, it makes no sense for employers to pay health insurance for their employees while the employees must pay extra money for their own as well.

* Healthy lifestyle

In my opinion a key to a healthy lifestyle is not perfection nor extreme diet and training approaches but simple things such as sustainability and steadiness. It is important to set some goals and work towards them. The main foundation of a healthy lifestyle consists of a quality sleep, resistance training and balanced diet full of macro and micronutrients, the rest are details but when combined they make up for the last part of the foundation.


### Specific task:
Explain a role of modern devices and technologies in medicine (laser, computer tomography ....)

* lasers
* computer tomography (x-ray)
* robotic surgery
* cyberattacks on hospitals

## Příklad řeči:
* lasers - eye operations, dermatology… (laser has a concentrated beam, how laser works…)
* computer tomography – it is a x-ray imagining procedure, which we can use for creating detailed images of internal organs, bones, soft tissue, blod vessels… detailed image of whole body or part of the body, we can choose
* robotic surgery – it is used for extremely precisious operations, where humans can’t get with basic tools; it can provide a live stream for the operating surgeon, who can sit a miles away
* vulnerability of hospital pc network against hacker attacks (in Czech Republic, we had some attacks against hospitals in Ostrava, Olomouc, Benešov…