# 8. Travelling. Transport. Accommodation

## Osnova:

 * Reasons of travelling
 * Popularity of travelling
 * Travelling abroad x in your country
 * Types of transportation (AD/DIS), private and public
 * You and transporting
 * Travel agencies
 * My last trip (holiday)
 * Hitch-hiking
 * Favourite vacation destinations

 
### Významná slovíčka:
commuting = pravidelné dojíždění
coach = zájezdový autobus
hitch-hikind = jízda stopem
luggage = zavazadla
accommodation = ubytování

## Příklad řeči:
* Reasons for travelling - There are many reasons. Basically, we can divide it into 2 groups. Personal and business.
  * Personal - The most common reasons is tourism. People travel to experience other cultures, discover new places, meet new interesting people and see interesting buildings, monuments or experience various attractions. People also travel for their basic needs, to meet their families, friends from distant places or even BCS they are moving. 
  * Business - on the other hand, another big reason for travelling is commuting to work and the movement of goods and products.

* Popularity of travelling - Due to covid travelling was partially prohibited by the government, but slowly these measures are being abolished. Perhaps one day we will travel again as we were used to.

* We can also divide travel according to the destination. Most private travels are in the country. But if you travel abroad you must have all the necessary documents. Passport or visa. Additionally, you should have travel arrangements and the currency of the country you are going to. Another example is foreign trade where you need to have some kind of documentation and pay duties.

* Types of transportation - There are many means of transportation that can be used while travelling. We can divide it into two groups - private and public
  * Private transportation includes cars, for shorter distances bicycles, scooters (with or without engine) or Segways. Some people use motorbikes instead of cars. Motorbikes are faster, especially in cities where they can avoid traffic jams, but more dangerous and can't carry that much luggage. Wealthy people can also afford a private helicopter or plane.
  * Public transportation has many varieties of options.
	For long travel across states, it is best to travel by plane. It usually takes few hours to reach distant destinations, but it's quite expensive and you have to spend a few hours at the airport before the flight.
	For more common use there are buses and trains (which can be long distances). Buses are usually cheaper, but less comfortable. Also travelling by bus may take longer because some regional buses do not go directly to the final stop. Trains offer more space and you can move during the journey (some long-distance trains have a dining car). There is also the possibility to travel by boat. It's very comfortable, you can carry a lot of luggage, even a car, but it takes longer.
	In cities, the main transport is the bus. Occasionally trams or trolleybuses. Larger cities have a subway. The main advantage of the subway is that it is very efficient and fast, many people can use it at the same time during rush hours. Another transport option is a taxi or uber, where you call the driver who will take you to your destination, transportation is comfortable but expensive. The disadvantages of public transport are sometimes delays.

* You and travelling - I use transportation on a daily basis because I commute to school. Mostly by train but I can also take the bus.

* Travel agencies - If you want to go on vacation you can use the services offered by travel agencies, Travel agencies will take care of accommodation, transportation, health and baggage insurance or even tour program. It's more comfortable but you pay for it.
  
* My last trip - ( Si něco domysli :) )

* Hitch-hiking - The cheapest is hitch-hiking. You can also meet interesting people, see new places and saves money. The downside is that you never know how long your trip will take and it can be quite dangerous. You never know who you will meet.

* favourite vacation destinations - Bcs there are a lot of sights and places of interest around the world, I'll talk about places in the Czech Republic:
  * Litovelské pomoraví - it's nature preserve forest which has habitats of mild climate. There are also known Moravian meanders. 
  * Věstonice - Village where were found artefacts of stone or ice age Věstonická venuše and some primitive tools.
  * Rabštejn - On the north of the village Oskava, there are ruins of the castle Rabštejn. It's a tourist point with a mountain pub where you can camp. There are also many trails for hiking and cross-country skiing.  There is also the possibility of rock climbing near the ruins.
  * Český Krumlov castle - castle from 13th centuary and UNESCO monument.
  * Colonnades of Karlovy Vary - cultural destination with the best spa in CZ.
  * The Bohemian paradise Adršpach - In eastern Bohemia. There are outstanding natural massive rocks which look like spike and pillars. This area is also under UNESCO protection.
  * Spa Velké Losiny - on the north-east from Šumperk, there are thermal spa and swimming pools. The water here is good for people with skin problems.
  * Brewery Plzeň - most famous Czech beer. In Pilsen, there is a museum and you can go on a tour of the brewery.
  * Šumava national park - typical for its swamps, bunkers and remains of the demilitarized borderline.
  * Abbys Macocha - In the Punkva caves - located north of Brno
  * Litovel brewer - my favourite location for concerts and cultural events... and also there is a source of my second favourite beer.  

### Specific task:
Explain how the car market is changing with the introduction of new fuel alternatives. 

* fuel alternatives (hydrogen, electricity, diesel, ethanol)
* market (demand of customers vs demand of "goverments")

## Příklad řeči:
* fuel alternatives for cars:
	* Hydrogen - abundant in our environment and therefore greatly accessible
	* Electricity - releases zero emissions, cheaper fuel, great acceleration
	* Biodiesel - has less energy content(biodiesel-powered vehicles require more fuel than standard diesel cars)
	* Ethanol - producing is energy-intensive, vehicles run fewer km per litre than if it was 100% gasoline-powered

* The car market is changing to meet customers demand, otherwise, it would be useless to produce cars that customers would not use.
for example, if a lot of people would want to have an electric car, then there would be more electric cars in the car market and it would probably be cheaper and more accessible for electric cars because customers would because that's what customers would want and what they would pay for.