# 9. Education. Our School. My Classroom. Learning English and Other Foreign Languages

## Osnova:

* CZ
  * pre-school education
  * compulsory (kinds of school)
  * primary (subjects)
  * secondary (grammar, special, aprentice centers)
  * universities (degrees, facultires)
* My School
* GB
* USA
 
### Významná slovíčka:
school attendance = školní docházka
SPŠE = secondary school of elektrotechnical engineering
deputy = zástupce ředitele

## Příklad řeči:
* CZ - School attendance in CZ is compulsory for children from 6 up to 15 and it's free of charge. Children have also the same possibilities for their future education. The system is split into 4 grades:
  * Pre-school - For babies aged from 1 to 3 years there are nursery school. Then from age 3 to 6, there are kindergartens. This pre-school education is not compulsory. Usually, parents register their children to nursery or kindergartens because they can't take care of them at home.
  * Primary - For children aged 6 to 15. This grade is compulsory for everyone. There are several types of schools. Most children attend state schools that are free of charge.
  On the other hand, private and church schools charges fees but the quality of teaching is different from states. Mainly school materials and equipment.
  In quotes, grammar schools are "harder" states school. They are from 11 years and there is an entrance examination.
  For handicapped children, there are special schools or they are educated individually.
  * Secondary - students over 15 attend secondary school. Education isn't compulsory and there are 3 main types of school. Grammar schools and special schools, which are finished with a school-leaving examination.  Apprentice centres are focused on practice so that students can go to work right after school.
  * Tertiary - Students with a school-leaving Certificate after entrance examination can go to college which last 4 to 6 years.
    * Bachelor - 3 years
    * Master - 5-6 years
    * Doctor - over 6 years with advance practice 
  
* GB - In Great Briain school attendance is compulsory for children aged 5 to 16. Primary schools are for children between 5 to 11. Secondary schools are for over 11. Children under the age of five can go to kindergartens.
Most British pupils (90%) attend state schools which are free of charge. After the age of 16, most of these pupils leave school and get jobs.    
In addition to the state system, there are fee-paying Independent Schools for pupils from 11 to 19 years, which are better known as Public Schools. Many of them are boarding schools. Some independent schools for younger pupils are for both boys and girls but a majority of the Public Secondary Schools are singe-sex. **Most known are Eton, Harrow and Rugby**.      
Secondary schools are completed with the examination called the General Certificate of Secondary Education (GCSE). The advanced level of this exam is a qualification for university.     
University courses usually last 3 to 4 years (5 or 6 years in medicine, dentistry and veterinary)

* USA - Attendance is compulsory from 6 to 16. And there are also nursery schools and kindergartens. Most children attend public schools, but there are also private and church schools. At public schools is education also free of charge while private schools charge schools fees. At age 6 start attend elementary schools. At 11 they transfer to secondary schools.      
Secondary education is provided by Middle schools (11 - 14) or by High Schools, which are divided into Junior High (12 - 15) and High School (15 - 18). Secondary school is finished by passing and examination then the student gets General Education Diploma.      
After High school graduation, students can continue to higher education at universities and colleges, which usually lasts 4 years.
**The oldest and most respected universities in the USA are all private schools. Harvard, Yale University, Princeton University**

* My school - It's been my fourth year at secondary school of electrotechnical engineering. There are two specializations at the school. Electro and Technical Lyceum. Electro, as you can find out from the name, is focused on electronics and hardware. On the other hand, the lyceum has nothing to do with electronics. It is generally focused on IT. Another difference is that students have practice on electro and lyceum isn't. I  went to the lyceum. And in addition to knowledge of basic subjects, I also have knowledge of specialized subjects such as CAD, Programming, Databases and general knowledge of networks.

### Special task:
What technical devices do you use at school?

* intro
* basic devices
* online education software
* special learning tools

## Příklad řeči:
* Today’s classrooms are filled with technology, from more common tools like interactive whiteboards to virtual reality devices. 
* In almost every class we can find a data projector which is a device that projects computer output onto a white or silver fabric screen that is on the wall, ceiling or tripod mounted. It is mostly used for slide presentations and displaying teaching materials.
* Most schools use special software for archiving pupil’s grades which usually also have other functions built-in (subject schedule, messages, homework).
To access those apps from school and be able to show teaching materials from the internet a lot of schools have their own wifi connection.
* Some schools even implement specific video games as learning tools to teach subjects like math or history. A good example is a popular video game called „Minecraft“ which helps with creativity, problem-solving, collaboration, etc.
Although there’s a lot of technology used, phones and other devices are usually prohibited during lessons.