# 10. Jobs and Employment
  
## Osnova

* Why people work, job opportunities
* manual X intelectual jobs
* state/private sector
* being self-employed
* looking for a job (what we must do)
* being unemployed
* my job experience
* my ideas from childhood
* My ideal job (way to do it)

### Významná slovíčka:

* apprentice center - učiliště
* apprenticeship - učení, zaučení
* blue-collar - dělnický pracovník 
* white-collar - úředník, duševně pracující 
* wage - mzda
* work contract - praconví smlouva 
* sallary - plat
* retiremnet - důchod 
* CV - životopis 
* measure = měřítko
* youth = mládí :)
* blue-collars = monterky
* white collar = úředník
* accountants = účetní
* tradesman = živnostík


## Příklad řeči:
* Why people work, job opportunities - The main reason for the work in a society is to earn a living. To work well you also need to have some kind of relationship to the job. Most of all, it's a feeling of success or moving forward. You should also use your talent. In the past, it was common that a person has had only a few jobs during his life. But now modern technologies have created a whole new class of jobs. The job opportunities are almost limitless. People often commonly change their jobs during their lifetime. Even today's education is designed to prepare young people for a future full of changes and challenges.
  
* manual X intellectual jobs - we can divide jobs into two main groups. Intelectual and manual. Or we can call people who do manual jobs blue-collars and intellectual white-collars. The main difference between them is that people who work manually work more with their "hands" (manually). On the other hand, White-collars work more with their "brain" (intellectually).
    * manual - Their education is shorter than the education for intellectual jobs. Young people are trained for them in the apprentice centres for two or three years - like cooks, electricians, mechanics, plumbers or miners. There are also some professions for which you must study four years and have a school-leaving exam. For example watchmaker, shop assistant or decorator.
    * intellectual - for these jobs you have to mostly pass a school-leaving exam or study some kind of university. The higher education you have, the better salary you usually get. The amount of salary also depends on the branch or industry. We can divide into several groups:
        * accountants
        * bankers
        * economists
        * various managers
        * humanities jobs - historians, judges, lawyers, language teachers or theoreticians
        * engineers
        * IT professionals
        * natural science - medicine doctors, nurses, veterinarians, biologists
        * Art jobs are special kinds of jobs in which people use their imagination and talent - painters, sculptors, actors, writers, musicians
        * Politicians, ministers, senators

* state/private sector - There are also two types of employment.
  * State sector - The state sector includes various administrative offices, ministries, courts, school and also health service. The amount of salary in the state sector is according to the salary tables and it depends on the years of experience.
  * Private sector - The private sector includes small private firms up to big multinational corporations. Employers have usually higher demands for qualifications and skills. 

* being self-employed - You can even have a job without any boss. These people are called freelancers or tradesmen. They decide for themselves when they will work. However, the disadvantage is that these people take responsibility for their business. If they are not careful they may lose lots of money. And also they can have problem with loans or taxes. Examples are artists and journalists but even some tradesmen who are managing their properties.

* looking for a job (what we must do) - When somebody looks for a job. He searches for advertisements in newspaper or online. There are also specialised internet website or agencies which help people find job and employers find suitable employees (like prace cz). So if somebody has already found an interesting offer. He has to write a motivation letter including a job application and CV (curriculum vitae). The CV describes your education, qualifications and work experience. The employer chooses between candidates based on the CV.  He then invites the selected candidates for an interview. At the interview are usually discussed plans and demands of the employee. If he succeeds then he signs the work contract which includes all important work conditions (salary, work hours, holiday etc.)

* being unemployed - As an unemployed, you can look for a job on your own or you can go employment Department where you can get tax relief when you prove that you are actively looking for work.

* my job experience - ❌
* my ideas from childhood - ❌
* My ideal job (way to do it) - ❌

### Special task:
Working as a programmer/expert in electrotechnology.

* intro
* what does programming mean
* learning programming
  
## Příklad řeči:
* Today I’m going to explain to you what it means when someone is working as a programmer.
* But what is programming? Programming is the process of creating a set of instructions that tell a computer how to perform a task. We can do that in many programming languages, for example, JavaScript, Python, C#, C++, and so on. It’s used to automate nearly everything we use in our daily lives. We have calculators, vacuum cleaner robots, and even self-driving cars.
* Programming is not a job for everyone. It can be hard for someone's ego because at any point in time there is something you don't know. Programming is just about continuous learning of new things. There is no point in a career when you know everything. Even the best senior programmers need to watch and learn new trends to stay relevant in this ever-changing industry. 
* We live in a time when you can become a programmer even without studying IT in school. On the internet are countless numbers of tutorials and courses on nearly every specific programming topic. 
* As a programmer, especially as a beginner you are very reliant on the community to help you with your problem. Fortunately, the programming community on the internet is huge, and on forums like StackOverflow or Reddit you can find answers for your problems even without asking anyone because most of your problems are already solved by someone. And why would you reinvent the wheel when it was already discovered? 
From this follows that programmers are actively trying to improve in one of the most underrated skills that exist nowadays which is Googling. 