# 11. Man and Society

## Osnova:

* the ground of the problems
* teenagers and their problems, generation gap
* drugs:
  * legal
  * soft    (my experience?)
  * hard 
* prohibiton
* diseases caused by
* unemployment
* children and their parents
* terorism
* wars
* migration
* fake news
* proverty
  
### Významná slovíčka:
* be on a dole - být na podpoře
* hepatitis - žloutenka
* school-leaver - absolvent školy
* vicious circle - začarovaný kruh (půjčky třeba)
* humiliating - ponižující
* mucous membrane - sliznice
* solvent - rozpouštědlo

## Příklad řeči:
Our contemporary world is very different in comparison with the world one hundred years ago and it’s becoming more and more complicated. Technologies are evolving faster and faster and some people may find it difficult to adapt to the changes. Especially young people struggle because they have to learn and grow in a very different world than their parents and teachers. Never in history was the generation gap that visible. Teenagers have to learn by themselves how finances and banking accounts work, how to use telephones, computers and how to orient in today's rushed world.

For many of them, this may be stressful. Then it depends on each one of them, how they will handle these factors. Somebody will go to a gym to suppress psychical pain with physical, somebody will fall for drugs.

Drugs are a problem all over the world. Most of them are illegal, but that doesn’t stop drug cartels, as drug trafficking remains the second biggest business in the world. Only military business is bigger.

Drugs can be divided into three groups, which all can be harmful to their user. First are hard drugs, these include cocaine, heroin, pervitin for the most known. Hard drugs are the most dangerous. Why people use them? Well, these drugs are the most efficient in changing moods and making their users feel confident, strong, independent, or relaxed. But they are highly addictive and can quickly destroy the human organism. They are all illegal, so they are very expensive. The users usually cannot focus on anything else than another shot, so they often lose their job and are forced to steal. There is also a risk of serious illnesses like AIDS or hepatitis. The second group is soft drugs. Here we can count marijuana or solvents. These drugs aren‘t so addictive or destructive but are still illegal, but it’s not that hard to purchase them.

There is also a group of legal drugs, like alcohol and tobacco. These drugs can be bought in normal supermarkets but can be bought only by a person older than 18 (in the Czech Republic). States are trying to limit consumption of these drugs by high taxes, but these taxes are also a reason, why are not these drugs banned, because they make huge money on these taxes. 

There are also some other very addictive activities that are not considered drugs. Even they are not drugs they are still super stimulants which means they release much more dopamine than normal everyday activities. These super stimulants are for example pornography or junk food.  

Drugs are not the only problem of today's world. There are some diseases known as civilization diseases. Here we can count AIDS, HIV, obesity, diabetes, heart diseases, and more others.

Unemployment is a serious problem in every country. In Czechia is not an as big problem as in other countries, in fact, we have one of best unemployment rate in EU. Unemployment can be caused by closing some industries, like coal mines in Ostrava. Lots of companies go bankrupt, so more people find themselves without income. In CZ we have some support in unemployment, but it's enough only to cover basic life needs. There is also a psychical factor of being unemployed because some people can find it humiliating, not to be able to take care of themselves.

Another problem is children, who have too busy parents to look after them. These parents usually try to compensate for it by giving their children money. But this can build bad habits in these children because they are used to have enough money, so they may not be able to take proper care of their finances while adults. Recent problems, that were happening in 2014-2019 mainly, are migration and international terrorism. These problems are mainly caused by unstable situations in Africa and the Middle East. Terrorism is now a little less problem since the „destruction“ of ISIS in Syria.

Fake news is a new serious problem, which widespread with a boom of the internet because the internet is a free medium, where anyone can post practically everything. So it’s harder than ever to obtain the right and true information, because of the existence of many conspiracy webs and other untrustworthy mediums. But it can be a problem even for TVs like ČT. This can cause problems for the older generation because they are used from older days to trust TV in everything.

Poverty is the inability of having choices and it‘s serious problem in practically every country, because for many reasons. The most serious is this problem in Africa and other 3rd world countries. Here is often occasion to live under 10 US dollars per day. In Europe is also poverty but in another way. We are able to help each other through social programs governed by the state.


### Special task:
What problems of contemporary society are caused by modern technologies? How does technology affect labour market? What benefits do the technologies bring to people in the branches of health care or education?

* problems in society caused by modern technologies
* affect on labour market
* positives in education
* positives in healthcare

## Příklad řeči: 
* Modern technology and inventions bring us lots of benefits, but also some negatives. For example, social networks are great for instant communication and sparing some moments with your loved ones, but they are also a perfect tool for cyberbullying because, on the internet and these platforms, you can choose every possible nickname and practically stay in absolute anonymity. This opportunity makes cyberbullying much easier because if you stay anonymous, you cannot be punished.
* Another problem is the generation gap. Today‘s kids are growing in a vastly different world, than their parents. This means they understand the internet and social networks much better than parents, who most time don’t care what their child is doing on the mobile. This can lead to some pretty bad situations (V síti for example).
* Technology also affected the labor market. It created whole new labor markets like electrotechnology, IT and changed practically everything else. This can lead to some robotization in factories and redundancies (propouštění). But, as I said, when these positions closed, many new ones opened in controlling these machines.
* New technologies also changed the way of learning at school. IT became a subject itself, many schools are adding new data projectors or TVs to make learning and teaching more flexible. Another advantage is the availability of information. In the past, we had to go to the library to find some useful information, today we only must have a connection to the internet and some device, most PC or laptop and we can find everything.
* In healthcare we started using a lot of new technologies to make it far better. We are using for example x-ray, ultrasound, lasers for cancer curing and skin or eye operations and newly we are starting to experiment with robotic surgery, which seems to be better for a patient in extra precious operations, where are human hands just too big, like brain operations.
