# 12. The Course of the Year. Weather. Time

## Osnova:

* climate in the cz, comparison with ocean climate (Britain) and inland climate (Russia)
* describe each season
* what happens in nature each season
* AD/DIS all seasons
* typical summer storm
* Indian summer
* Harvest
* my favourite season (why? :) )
* major events in each season (christmas, big holidays, start of new schoolyear…)
* describe the weather of recent days
* Actual climate problems
  * climate change
  * global warming -> we can see some "symptoms" here (bad winters, dry periods...)

### Významná slovíčka:
* blossom - kvést
* catkins - kočičky
* chilly - chladno
* hail - krupobití, kroupy
* fog - mlha
* dense fog - hustá mlha
* heavy downpour - silný liják
* humid - vlhko
* temperate zone - mírné pásmo
* weather forecast - předpověď počasí

## Příklad řeči:
The Czech republic has a temperate climate. In summer, temperatures aren’t usually higher than 25-35 degrees Celsia and in winter usually don’t fall under 10 degrees. We are some middlestep between ocean climate, where the differences in temperature aren’t so drastic, rains more often and winters are quite warm and inland climate, where summers are hot, winters cold and rain is quite rare. Year in CZ is divided into 4 seasons, spring, summer, autumn, winter.

Many people consider spring the most beautiful season of the year. Nature is awaking from winter sleep, trees are blooming and days are getting longer and nights shorter. There is more sunshine and it becomes warmer and warmer. Weather as a whole can be very unpredictable, especially in April. Temperatures exceed from 20 degrees to 0 in one week. It may even snow, as the winter tries to keep up. Floods can happen, because of melting ice and snow from the mountains. Last big flood in Czech republic happened in 2013 in Prague, but the worst floods happened in 2002 in Prague and in 1997 in Olomouc.

Summer begins at 21st of June. In summer, there are 2 month long holidays for schoolchildren. Everybody is more interested in weather, because most people set out on holidays. Temperature often rise over 25 degrees and it can be quite hot and we can have many nice and sunny days in a row. But sometimes there comes summer storm. It usually comes really quickly, sky clouds over, it gets dark and the temperature falls. Strong wind starts and the storm is about to break. Then there is a crash of thunder and a flash of lightning, followed by a heaavy downpour or even a hail. It’s dangerous to stay under a tree, as the lightning might hit it.

Summer is also time of fresh strawberries, raspberries, cherries and blueberries.

At the beginning of September, children goes back to school. There is a short time called indian summer, but on September 23rd autumn begins. Trees are changing colors to red, yellow and brown, days are getting shorter and colder. Early autumn is also time of harvest. People pick apples, pears, plums as well as harvest potatoes and sugar beets.By Novenbwr, trees are bare and nature is preparing for upcoming winter. Sky is becoming cloudy more often, mornings are foggy and rain is quite often.

Winter arrives at 21st of December, but in last years it had quite delay. I can’t remember on Christmas with snow, because of global warming. Snow usually falls in the middle od January, when ski time begins.

Global warming has also impact on Czech climate. As I said, winter are becoming warmer, there’s less snow and it becomes quite rare. Summers are starting to get hotter and hotter and in the last years we had serious problems with dry periods, which was caused by little of rain, snow and the fact, that CZ is considered as the roof of Europe. That means, that we don’t have any rivers going to our area from another state, every river in CZ is going out.


### Specific task:
Explain how satnav works.

- GPS history
- basics of GPS technology
- today's navigation systems

## Příklad řeči:
- All modern sat-nav systems rely on the Global Positioning System (GPS) known as Navstar. This is powered by a system of 24 satellites orbiting the Earth at an altitude of approximately 11,500 miles (24,000km). They were originally put into orbit by the United States during the Cold War under top secret conditions, to guide intercontinental ballistic missiles to their targets.
- Each GPS satellite contains an extremely accurate clock and continually broadcasts its location and time, known as ephemeris data. A GPS receiver works by comparing the location and time data to its own and working out its distance from the satellite. This by itself is pretty useless for pinpointing position, but when data from several satellites are used simultaneously it's very effective. The minimum number of satellites for effective navigation is four, but the way they are arranged means there are usually 10 above each part of the world at any one time.
- GPS is basically a very hi-tech version of the traditional navigation technique, triangulation. The signal from the satellites was at one time degraded which gave inaccuracies of up to 330ft (100m) but this changed in the year 2000, and accuracy is now within 50ft (15m). However the US military can still scramble or turn GPS off at will.
- Today's navigation systems go beyond GPS. Cell phones can triangulate their position between mobile phone masts, whereas sat-navs contain compasses and accelerometers to help them navigate safely. But as many frustrated drivers know, this is still far from being full-proof.
