# 13. Nature. Environmental Protection

## Osnova:

* realionship betweem people and nature (now x pass)
* pollution - water, air, soil
* greenhouse effect
* global warming
* rainforests
* ozone layer
* waste

### Významná slovíčka:
* blossom - květ 
* breeze - vánek 
* daffodils - narcisy 
* drizle - mrholit 
* heavy downpour - silný liják 
* humid - vlhko 
* overcast - zataženo 
* sultry - dusno
* temperate zone - mírné pásmo

## Příklad řeči:
* The environment is a place where people, animals, and plants develop and live their lives. Part of biology is investigating the relationship between living creatures and their environment and that's called ecology. Ecology is a science that concerns the balance between nature and creatures. People called ecologists and environmentalists are aware of the bad state of the environment and the requirement of its protection. The human environment is being destroyed by people's deeds. Environmental problems affect all countries and all places of the World. Its already been confirmed that pollution is one of the biggest problems in our age. We have polluted the whole planet due to our selfishness and comfort.
* One of the biggest problems nowadays is air pollution concentrated in large cities and areas. It's a mixture of solid particles and gases in the air. Emissions are caused by cars, chemicals from factories, and dust. Ozone and gas are a major part of air pollution in cities. When ozone forms air pollution, it's also called smog. Some air pollutions are poisonous. Causes of air pollution are the burning of Fossil Fuels, Waste in Landfills, Exhaust from factories and industries, mining operations, and some natural events. Air pollution can affect people's health include heart disease, lung cancer, and respiratory problems like emphysema, or cause some long-term damage to nerves, brain, and other organs.  
* The greenhouse effect is caused by the atmospheric accumulation of gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, which contain some of the heat emitted from the Earth's surface. This radiation tends to be absorbed by the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, raising its temperature. The largest source of greenhouse gas emissions is in the US from burning fossil fuels for electricity, heat, and transportation. Around 62% of electricity comes from burning fossil fuels like coal and natural gas.
* Global warming is the long-term heating of the earth's climate system observed due to human activities, primarily fossil fuel burning, which increases heat-trapping greenhouse gas levels in the earth's atmosphere. That means increased heat, increased wildfires, declining water supplies, and health impact due to heat.
* Rainforest is the area of tall trees (mostly evergreen trees) characterized by the high amount and continuous rainfall. They are Earth's oldest living ecosystems surviving in their form of at least 70 million years. It's home to at least more than half of the world's plant and animal species even they cover just 6% of Earth's surface. On 10-square-kilometer patch can contain about 1500 flowers/plants,750 species of trees, and 400 species of birds.
* Waste is everything that is discarded after primary use or is worthless and there isn't a way of re-use or recyclation. Nowadays there is a problem with storage waste. People started to solve the problem with dumps and landfills. The problem is air pollution and it directly affects many ecosystems and species. Waste helps greenhouse gas to change the climate.

### Specific task:
What is alternative energy? Which materials can be recycled and how can a person be environmentally friendly?

* What is alternative energy
* Sources (wind, solar, tidal)
* Recyclable materials
* How to be ecological

* Alternative energy = renewable energy – energy that is collected from renewable sources(sunlight, wind, rain, tides, waves)
* Alternative sources:
  * Wind energy - This is one of the cleanest and most accessible sources of energy
    * AD: Clean & Environment, Cost-Effective, friendly Fuel source
    * DIS: Noise and aesthetic pollution
  * Solar energy - This is probably the most commonly known source of alternative energy
    * AD: Reduces Electricity Bills, Technology Development
    * DIS: Weather Dependent, Solar Energy Storage is Expensive
  * Tidal energy - This method of energy production is still fairly new and has only produced a small amount of energy so far, so it will be a long time before we see real results from tidal energy.
    * AD: Environment-friendly, a highly predictable energy source
    * DIS: High tidal power plant construction costs
* Recyclable materials include many kinds of glass, paper, cardboard, metal, plastic, tires, textiles, batteries, and electronics
Being environmentally friendly simply means having a lifestyle that is better for the environment.
* A good way would be to start with conserving water, driving less and walking more, consuming less energy, buying recycled products, eating locally grown vegetables, joining environmental groups to combat air pollution, creating less waste, planting more trees, and many more.