# 14. Means of Communication. Mass Media

# Osnova
- Person-to-person communication
  - ways we can communicate: calls, text, ... 
  - emojis as substite for non-verbal communication 
  - person-to-person vs passive communication 
- Mass media 
  - division: readable information/listenable and watchable information; online/offline 
- Ads 

# Alternativní osnova 
* the term
* type of mass media
* readeble - periodicals, newspaper (serious/tabloit)
* TV, radio - differences (the payment)
* me and tv, my favourite channels/station, program
* the internet:
  * AD/DIS
  * news
  * shopping
  * commucation
  * the history of the internet

### Významná slovíčka:
❌
  
## Příklad řeči:
### Person-to-person communication

We live in times when we can speak or even see a person that can be even on the other side of the globe. In comparison to our ancestors nowadays we have so many options from which to choose when we want to contact someone. We can for example call them via our phone. For this, we can use classic calls with the use of a sim card in a phone or some app like WhatsApp, discord, or messenger. These apps are free. The only thing we need is an internet connection. With some of these apps, we can even hop onto a video call to not only hear the person but also see him or her. If we don't want to call we can write a person via email or some kind of instant messaging app like Instagram direct, messenger, and so on. 

Nowadays the important part of messaging is the usage of emojis. Emojis projects emotions and simulates non-verbal communication that can't be acquired the same as in normal talk. Two same written messages with the only difference in emojis can mean in some extreme cases even an absolute opposite.  

Every type of communication I mentioned can be described as person-to-person communication. This means that both sides are contributing to the communication. Another type of communication I like to call the passive one. In passive communication one side presents information and the other side consumes them.  As an example of this kind of communication, I can give you TV and internet news, radio, or newspapers. Another way we can label this type is the term mass media. 
  
### Mass media  

Mass media can reach out to people in many ways. We can divide them into 2 main ways. The first division is readable and listenable. Among those, we read we include magazines, newspapers, or articles on the internet. On the other hand, as listenable we consider news on TV, radio, or podcast and news on the internet. The second way we can divide mass media is if they are online or so-called offline. Online mass media are all the articles, videos, and podcasts on the internet. The offline is the rest. 

### Ads 

The last thing I wanna talk about is ads. Internet and social media opened new ways of personalized advertisements. On the internet, each and every person is receiving a little bit different kinds of ads which differ by their ways of interest and places they visited on the internet. Sometimes it can be even scary how accurately the adds fits one's needs. 
  
### Specific task:
Explain how radio, television, and the internet work.

- Radio
- TV
- Internet

## Příklad řeči:

* Radio - The antenna radiates the power in the current as radio waves. When the waves strike the antenna of a radio receiver, they push the electrons in the metal back and forth, inducing a tiny alternating current. The radio receiver connected to the receiving antenna detects this oscillating current and amplifies it.
* Television - Television is a three-part invention: the TV camera that turns a picture and sound into a signal; the TV transmitter that sends the signal through the air; and the TV receiver (the TV set in your home) that captures the signal and turns it back into picture and sound.
* Internet – internet is only a bunch of PC’s wired together
  * thanks to that, they can share information, over time, there developed a lot of protocols and some like that stuff, to secure the communication, or make in easier. The Internet has one very simple job: to move computerized information (known as data) from one place to another. That's it! The machines that make up the Internet treat all the information they handle in the same way. In this respect, the Internet works a bit like the postal service.
  * interesting fact about internet communication – thanks to the internet, it’s hard for dictator regimes to stay in power because there are ways how to stay anonymous on the internet (VPN relatively, Dark web, specialized applications with end-to-end encryption…)


