# 15. The Czech Republic. Prague

## Osnova:
- Basic info 
- History 
- Geography 
- Political System 
- Prague 
- My trip to Prague

## Alternativní osnova:

* history
* geography - neighbouring states, landscape, rivers
* industry, agriculture
* places which are worth visiting (spas, castles)
* famous products
* political system
* Prague
  * type of city
  * location, inhabitans
  * Charles IV.
  * famous sights
  * parts of Prague
  * the commercial centre
  * museums, theatres
  * moder life in Prague
  * my last trip in Prague
  
### Významná slovíčka:
* Czech republic 
  * the Crown Jewels - korunovační klenoty 
  * Slavonic tribes - slovanské kmeny
  Giant Mountains - Krkonoše 

* Prague
  * astronomical clock - orloj
  * estates - sídliště
  * Golden Lane - zlatá ulička
  * Lesser Town - Malá Strana
  * National Theatre - Národní divadlo 
  * Powder Gate - Prašná brána 
  * Prague Castle - Pražský hrad 
  * suburb - předměstí 

  
## Příklad řeči:
### Basics

The Czech Republic is an independent state located in Central Europe. Its neighbors are Austria, Poland, Slovakia, and Germany. The country consists of three main regions Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. These regions are then divided into 13 smaller regions and independent region of the capital city Prague. The population of the Czech Republic is approximately around 10 million inhabitants. 

### History 

The country began to form in the 9th century with the creation of Great Moravia. After its fall, the Czech state emerged. The Czech lands became a part of the Holy Roman Empire in the 10th century. King Charles IV was crowned Holy Roman Emperor in 1355. His rule is known as “the Golden Age” of Czech history. He established Charles University, the first university in Central Europe, in 1348. The religious leader Jan Hus was executed in 1415. The Hussite Wars followed. Under the reign of the Habsburgs, the Czech lands became part of the Austro‐Hungarian Empire. The 19th century saw the revival of the Czech language and Czech national consciousness. An independent Czechoslovakia was formed on October 28, 1918 after WW1. Masaryk was the first President. In 1938 the Munich Agreement between Germany, Italy, France, and Great Britain saw the Sudetenland region given to Germany. The next year Germany invaded
what remained of Czechoslovakia. In 1948 the Communist Party took power. In 1989 the ‘Velvet Revolution’ saw the end of communism. Václav Havel became the first president of a newly democratic Czechoslovakia. In 1993 the ‘Velvet Divorce’ saw the separation of Czechoslovakia into the Czech Republic and Slovakia. In 2004 the Czech Republic became a full member of the European Union. In 2007 it became a member of the Schengen Area.

### Geography 

The Czech Republic has a temperate continental climate with four distinct seasons. The terrain is mostly hilly and around borders even mountainous. 
The center of the country is on the other hand proportionately flat. A number of rivers such as the Labe, the Vltava, and the Morava flow through the country. In Bohemia, there are also many ponds, especially in the south. The country often suffers from floods. The land is quite
heavily forested. Šumava in the south has some of the oldest forests in the country. Český ráj (Bohemian Paradise) is a popular area for hiking and has many interesting rock formations. Moravian Karst is famous
for its cave systems.

### Political system 

The Czech Republic is a parliamentary democracy. The parliament is two-chambered. The lower house is called the Chamber of Deputies (200 members)
and the upper house is called the Senate (81 senators). Elections for the Chamber of Deputies are held every four years (unless the government is dissolved
earlier). The Chamber of Deputies has proportional representation. A third of the Senate is elected for a six‐year term with elections occurring every two years. The government is formed from the lower house. The head of the government is the prime minister. The head of state is the president, who is elected every five years and can only be elected for two terms. The parliament is representing the legislative power. The executive power is in the hands of the prime minister and judicial power is represented by courts. 

### Prague
As I said earlier, the capital of the country is Prague. Prague is the largest city with around 1.2 million inhabitants.  It is a popular tourist destination. Prague is known as “the Golden City” and “the City of a Hundred
Spires” because of its rich architecture (many churches
and cathedrals). Some popular sites in Prague are
Prague Castle, Charles Bridge, the Astrological Clock,
and the Old Town Square. 

Last time I was in Prague... (každej si domyslí svůj úžasný kulervoucí příběh) 
  
### Specific task:
The most famous Czech scientists, technicians, inventors

## Příklad řeči: 

### Prokop Diviš 
He was a theologian and natural scientist. He became interested in atmospheric electricity and his biggest invention was the lightning rod and stringed instrument „Golden Divis“ or Denis d'or

### Jaroslav Heyrovský 
He was a chemist and inventor of the polarographic method he received the Nobel prize for discovery and development of the polarographic methods 

### Antonín Holý 
He was a scientist and he was cooperating on the development of antiretroviral drugs used for the treatment of HIV and HBV (hepatitis B)
František křižík was an inventor, electrical engineer, and entrepreneur. He is considered a pioneer of practical electrical engineering and he invented a remotely operated signaling device to protect against collision between trains.

### Otto Wichterle 
He was a chemist best known for his invention of modern soft contact lenses. He was president of the Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Stanislav Brebera was a chemist and world leader in the production and export of armaments. He is best known for developing the plastic explosive known as Semtex in the 1950s.

