# 17. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. The U.S.A.

## Osnova: 
* UK
  * where is UK located? 
  * history 
  * climate and landscape
  * political system
  * famous places
  * would you live here?
* USA
  * where is USA located?
  * when and who discovered America(history)
  * climate and landscape
  * political system
  * famous places
  * would you live here?

### Významná slovíčka:
* anthem - hymna
* duke - vévoda 
* ferryboat - trajekt 
* fort - pevnost 
* humid - vlhký 

  
## Příklad řeči:

### Great Britain

Great Britain is an island nation in north-western Europe. On the eastern coast is the North Sea and on the western coast is the Atlantic Ocean. Between England and France is channel La Manche. If you want to go to England so you can go on the ferry from France, fly by plane or with the usage of Eurotunnel (also known as Channel tunnel).

The first people to settle in England were the Celts about 3000 years ago. In 43, England was occupied by the Romans and remained there for about 400 years. In 1215, the Magna Carta was signed. It was the first document to limit the powers of the monarch over his subjects by law. Between 1338 and 1453, the Hundred Years War took place.

In Great Britain, the climate is temperate and humid due to the Gulf Stream. Winters are mild and summers are not very hot. It rains here very often so it's here greener. The landscape in the UK is mainly hilly although the mountains here are not so high. The highest mountain is Ben Nevis in Scotland - 1,342 m high. British rivers are quite short, but there are important harbors on them.

The United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy. The UK consists of England, Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland. British political system is headed by the monarch (Queen Elizabeth II). The powers of the monarch are ceremonial. Parliament is divided into two Houses. First is the House of Commons and second is the House of Lords. Any new bill must pass through both Houses and after that, it is sent to the Queen for the Royal Assent. 

The official language is English but the dialect is slightly different between regions. Scottish and Welsh dialects are so different that even native speakers have trouble understanding them. Around 57 million people live in the UK and the most populated area in England. The UK is primarily a Christian country but there are also religious minorities such as Islam and Hinduism.

There are many famous places to see in London. One of them is for example Big Ben which is one of the towers that you cannot miss if you go to London. Definitely, another place is Buckingham Palace, and it's changing of the guard. Another place is The Tower of London which was a prison in history and is now the place where the crown jewels are hidden. Not everything interesting is located in London. For example, if we go west we can visit Stonehenge and if we go north we come across the famous Loch Ness lake where the Loch Ness monster is said to be hidden.

The flag is called the Union Jack and symbolizes the union of England, ScosQueen".

### USA

The USA is a federation of 50 states. 48 of them are in the southern part of North America, Alaska is in the northwest and Hawaii is an island in the Pacific Ocean. The northern neighbor is Canada and on the other side to the south is Mexico.

America was discovered in 1492 by Christopher Colombus, who was a trader and wanted to find a shorter route to India because he believed that the earth was round. He believed he had arrived in India and that's why the natives have been called Indians ever since. In the 17th century, the Americas began to be colonized.

The climate varies from hot and dry deserts in the southwest to subtropical Hawaii to cold tundra in Alaska. The landscape of the USA is very diverse. The wide central plains are bordered by the Rocky Mountains, Sierra Nevada, and the Cascades in the west, and by the Appalachian Mountains in the east. Around the Gulf of Mexico, there is another extensive plain. The highest mountain is Mount McKinley in Alaska, which is 6194 meters high. (Maturita učebnice)

The legislative branch is made up of elected representatives. The Congress is divided into two parts: The House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives consists of about 450 lawmakers who are elected for 2 years. Senate has 100 – 2 for each state of the federation – who serve for 6 years. The main task of Congress is to make federal laws.

The executive branch is represented by the President and 13 executive departments. He is elected every 4 years. The main tasks of the President are: President proposes and vetoes bills, serves as the Commander in Chief of Armed Forces, sings treaties, and appoints federals judges and ambassadors.

The judicial branch is made up of Federal Districts Courts, 11 Federal Courts of Appeals and on the top the Supreme Court.

In the USA there are two main political parties: The democratic party, which is more liberal, and the Republican Party, which puts more emphasis on private enterprise and individual initiative.

The USA population is about 250 000 000 people - 79% of them white, 12% black and the rest are Asians, Mexicans, Pacific Islanders, Indians, and Eskimos. Nearly 80% of all inhabitants live in urban areas - cities or their surrounding areas. The official language of the USA is American English. It differs from British English in spelling, pronunciation, and vocabulary. There are also many ethnic minorities that speak dialects or their native languages, such as Chinese or Spanish.(zase maturita učebnice protože nemam nic lepšího)

Famous Places

* Grand Canyon
* Niagara Falls
* Statue of Liberty
* White House
* Yosemite National Park
* Times Square
* Yellowstone National Park


The national flag consists of 50 white stars symbolizing the 50 American states, and one larger oblong consisting of 6 white and 7 red stripes symbolizing the original 13 states. The national anthem is called „The Star-Spangled Banner.






### Specific task:
Do you know any famous scientists from these countries?
<br>
- Thomas Alva Edison
  - when did he live 
  - what did he invent
- Stephen Hawking
  - when did he live 
  - what did he invent

## Příklad řeči: 

### Thomas Alva Edison 
Thomas Alva Edison was an American inventor and businessman who has been described as America's greatest inventor. He lived in the 19th and the 20th century. He developed many devices in fields such as electric power generation, mass communication, sound recording, and motion pictures. These inventions, which include the phonograph, the motion picture camera, and early versions of the electric light bulb, have had a widespread impact on the modern industrialized world. <br>
He was one of the first inventors to apply the principles of organized science and teamwork to the process of invention, working with many researchers and employees. He established the first industrial research laboratory.

### Stephne Hawking 
Stephen William Hawking was an English theoretical physicist, cosmologist, and author who was director of research at the Centre for Theoretical Cosmology at the University of Cambridge at the time of his death. He was the Lucasian Professor of Mathematics at the University of Cambridge between 1979 and 2009. <br>
Hawking published many science books. His book A brief history of time was written for a wide audience. Thanks to Hawking's writing skills and sense of humor this book became a bestseller. 