# 18. The English-Speaking Countries (Commonwealth, Canada, Australia etc.)

## Osnova: 

* Commonwealth:
    * Commonwealth is association of the 54 states.   
    * Nearly all of them were British colonies.
    * The main ones are Canada, Astralia and New Zeland
  
1. Canada
   * Introduction (position, neighboring states/oceans)
   * Landscape (islands, lakes, hills, rivers...)
   * Climate (differences)
   * History (Discovering of Canada)
   * Population (overall, minotiries, large cities/provincies)
   * Natural resources
   * Political system
   * Interesting places :)
  
2. Astralia
   * Introduction (position, inhabitants, area, neighboring states/oceans)
   * Landscape (islands, lakes, hills, rivers...)
   * Climate (differences)
   * History
   * Population
   * Political system
   * Interesting places

3. New Zeland
   * Introduciton (2 islands)
   * Population
   * Landscape
   * Interesting places

### Významná slovíčka:
* below the sea level - pod úrovní moře 
* Commonwealth - společenstvo národů 
* kangaroo - klokan 
* tasmanian devil - tasmánský ďábel 
* platypus - ptakopysk 
* natinal emblem - národní znak 
* natural resources - přírodní zdroje 
* uninhabited - neobydlený 
* vast plains - rozshálhé pláně 


## Příklad řeči: 
1. Canada
   * Canada is the second-largest country in the world. It covers more than half of the North American continent and many islands.
   Canada has a border with the USA in the south and the northwest with Alaska. From the east, there is the Atlantic Ocean and from the west Pacific ocean.
   * The terrain is very diverse. Eastern Canada has hills and mountains, the central part is covered by plains. In the west, there are Rocky mountains. The highest mountain is Mt. Logan - 6050m high.     
   Canada is a country of lakes. There are thousands of them. The largest is Lake Erie and Ontario - between them there are the famous Niagara Falls. Other lakes are Great Bear Lake, Great Slave Lake, Lake Winnipeg. The longest river is Mackenzie. Other big rivers are Yukon, Fraser, Columbia, and the St. Lawrence River.
   * Canada has mostly a continental climate with warm and sunny summers and long cold winters. On the east (pacific coast) the climate is milder. On the north, which is mostly uninhabited, has artic climate.
   * About history... The Vikings first discovered Canada more than a thousand years ago. Then Europeans come there in the 15th century with the arrival in the USA. The name Canada comes from the Indian word "Kanata", which means village of community. Before that, the country was called New France or British North America. Canada was a British colony. Now it is a self-governing member of the British Commonwealth.
   * Population is about 24M. About 45% of them are of British origin, 30% of French origin, and over 20% of European origin. There are about 300k native Indians and around 20k Eskimos. The Eskimos live in the Arctic regions. Indians live mostly in villages in the prairies. Most inhabitants live near the U.S./Canadian borders. The capital city is Ottawa. The largest city is Montreal. Other large cities are Toronto, Winnipeg, Edmonton, Calgary, Quebec, and Vancouver.
   * Canada has rich natural resources and minerals. There are large deposits of coal, iron ore, oil, natural gas, copper, zinc, nickel, lead, uranium, etc. The greatest resource is wood from forests. Canada is a major exporter of lumber, wood, and printing paper.
   * Canada has a Federal Parliament consisting of two houses: the House of Commons and the Senate. the Queen is represented by the Governor-General. The real head of the state is the Prime Minister. He selects his own Cabinet. There are two leading parties: The Liberal Party and the Progressive Conservative Party.
   Canada is divided into 10 provinces and 2 territories.

2. Australia
   * Australia is the smallest continent on Earth. It has a population of about 17 million inhabitants. 
   * Australia was discovered by a Dutch explorer in the year 1770. 
   * Original inhabitants are called Aborigines.
   * The climate varies from warm to subtropical. About 80% of the Australian land suffers from drought, that’s why there are many deserts. There are 4 great deserts in Australia: the Great Sandy Desert, Gibson Desert, Great Victoria Desert, and Simson Desert.
   * In the Pacific Ocean, there is the Great Barrier Reef. The eastern coast is bordered by Australian Cordilleras.
   * The highest point of Australia is Mt. Kosciusko (2000+)
   * Only 9% of Australia is arable
   * Around 85% of Australians live in urban areas mainly along the southern coast.
   * The capital of Australia is Canberra. Another two important cities are Melbourne and Sydney. 
   * Australia has a democratic, federal system and the head of the state is Queen Elizabeth II. represented by Governor-General. The Commonwealth of Australia consists of six states: New South Wales (Sydney), Victoria (Melbourne), Queensland (Brisbane), South Australia (Adelaide), Western Australia (Perth), Tasmania (Hobart), and two territories: The Australian Capital Territory and Northern Territory.

3. New Zealand 
   * NZ consists of 2 large islands (North and South Island) in the southwest Pacific Ocean. The population is about 3 million people.
   * Wellington is the capital of New Zealand. It is the seat of Parliament and a political, commercial, and cultural center. It is surrounded by mountains, which offer a magnificent view over the city. Wellington is the most important city in the country.
   * The largest and most modern city in NZ in Auckland.


### Specific task:
You are preparing  a presentation about famous personalities in your field of study at our school. Introduce James Gosling (dr. Java) , a Canadian computer scientist, to your classmates.

## Příklad řeči: 
* James Gosling:
    *	canadian software engineer famous for creating Java which is object oriented programming language
    *	he got his Ph.D. title on Carnegie Mellon University in 1983
    *	his other creations are for example text editor Emacs, many translators, e-mail agents and window managers, he was also the first developer of the table processor sc
    *	in 2011 he started working for Google and later he used to collaborate on start up Liquid Robotics
* Java: 
   * Java is a high-level, class-based, object-oriented programming language that is designed to have as few implementation dependencies as possible. It is a general-purpose programming language intended to let application developers write once, run anywhere, meaning that compiled Java code can run on all platforms that support Java without the need for recompilation. Java applications are typically compiled to bytecode that can run on any Java virtual machine regardless of the underlying computer architecture.
   * The syntax of Java is similar to C and C++ but has fewer low-level facilities than either of them. The Java runtime provides dynamic capabilities (such as reflection and runtime code modification) that are typically not available in traditional compiled languages. As of 2019, Java was one of the most popular programming languages in use according to GitHub,[18][19] particularly for client-server web applications and desktop applications, with a reported 9 million developers.





