# 19. Customs and Traditions. Holidays and Feastdays

## Osnova:

* Chirstian x national festivals
* Christmas (CZ, GB, my xmas)
* Easter - CZ, GB, USA)
* National festival (CZ, GB, USA)
* my favourite festival (in my village, my birthday)

  
### Významná slovíčka:
* braided reed - pomlázka 
* candle - svíčka 
* chimney komín 
* crucifixion - ukřizování 
* customs - zvyky 
* feast - svátek 

  
## Příklad řeči:
In the Czech Republic, almost everyone celebrates Christian holidays (Christmas and Easter and it doesn't matter if you're religious or not.)

### Christmas:

Christmas in CR is celebrated on the 24TH of December. We start to prepare for Christmas four weeks before. This time is called „Advent“. Some kids have their „Christmas Calendars“ it has 24 windows and every day you can open one and you will find a piece of chocolate. Usually, Czech women start to clean and decorate the house. They also bake Christmas sweets. On the 24th December, the most important day of Christmas, some people have a tradition that they cannot eat food till evening, and reward for this is that they will see the golden pig. For Christmas dinner, Czech people usually have lentil or fish soup and fried carp with potato salad. But nowadays more and more have chicken schnitzel instead of carp, usually kids. After dinner family gathers around the Christmas tree to unwrap presents. Kids believe that little Jesus brings them. Over the next two days, Czechs visit their relatives and friends and bring them small presents. Or some simply stay at home.

Christmas is celebrated a bit differently in the UK. Kids hang stockings and believe that Father Christmas will fill them with presents. On Christmas Eve after kids have gone to bed, Santa rides a sled pulled by reindeers in the sky, entering homes through chimneys. In the morning kids get up as early as possible in the morning and they sing Christmas carols. They open the gifts which were left there by Father Christmas the night before. When all the gifts are opened, Christmas dinner is eaten. This is roast turkey, potatoes, vegetables, and Christmas pudding. Boxing day is the 26th of December and it is named after the tradition of giving dustmen, newspaper boys, milkmen, postmen, etc. small sums of money inboxes. 

### Easter:

Easter differs between countries. In CR is celebrated in early spring. On Easter Monday, men and boys go from house to house to hit women with a stick made of woven willow so that girls and women stay beautiful and young. After that girls give them colored eggs or chocolate some even give them a shot of „slivovitz“.  

Easter in the UK is celebrated on the 1st of Sunday after the first full moon in spring but it starts on Ash Wednesday 40 days before Easter. It is a Christian festival, marking the crucifixion and resurgence of Christ. Many people go to church. Good Friday – Christ was crucified on that day, Easter Sunday – his resurrection. On Good Friday hot cross buns are eaten for breakfast. Kids believe that the Easter Bunny has hidden eggs in the house and go searching for them. This is called an egg hunt.

Easter is celebrated in the USA on Easter Sunday. It is a bit different from the Czech Republic and the UK. Every year at this time, parents of children hide Easter eggs in various places around the house and let the children look for them.

### National festival:

The most important day in the Czech is the 28th of October, the anniversary of the birth of Czechoslovakia. On the 8th of May, we celebrate the end of World War II. St. Wenceslas Day is on the 28th of September and honors the important Czech prince Wenceslas, who was murdered and later proclaimed a saint. The 17th of November marks the Day of Fight for Freedom and Democracy, commemorating this in 1989 when Communists rule was broken

An important day for the UK is Guy Fawkes Day also called „Bonfire Night“ – celebrated on November 5. It is named after Guy Fawkes who wanted to blow up the Parliament and the King in 1605

A very important day for the USA is Thanksgiving day and it is celebrated last Thursday in November. Pilgrim Fathers settled in America in 1620. The winter was cold and half of them died. In spring they planted corn and other plants with help and advice from the Indians. In autumn they celebrated a good harvest and had a feast with much food. They called this day the day of Thanksgiving. It is a family holiday the whole family gathers together and enjoys a traditional dinner – roast turkey, bread stuffing, mashed potatoes, cranberry sauce, and pumpkin pie.

But there are also global festivals. Halloween starts on 31st October. In the evening children light pumpkin lanterns called jack o lanterns to chase away witches and evil spirits, they dress up as saints, angels, devils, witches, and ghosts. They knock on the door and say: „Trick or treat!“ and if they are not given candies, popcorn, or cookies, they will play a trick. In the Czech Republic, we don't celebrate Halloween like in the USA. Instead of dressing up in a costume, we go to the cemetery and light a candle for our dead 

### Specific task:
Many of presents need a battery to be run. What types of cells do you know? 

* AAA
* AA
* C
* Cell/coin batteries
* special types
  
## Příklad řeči: 
* The most common and popular batteries on the marker are the AAA batteries. These batteries can be used in smaller devices such as remote controllers, very small toys, or clocks.
* Another pretty common battery type is the AA. The AA batteries are bigger than the AAA batteries from which it follows they can power larger devices like different types of remote controllers, toys, or small electronics
* Type C batteries are also somehow used in some presents such as bigger toys or bigger lamps. Batteries of this type are not that common, because they are pretty large.
* Last but not least are the cell or coin batteries. These batteries are very small so it follows that these battery types are used in small gifts like hand watches
* special rechargable bateries:
	* car batteries
	* mobile batteries
    * li-ion - smaller appliances
