# 20. Policy and Economics, Systems of Government, the European Union

## Osnova: 
* CZ
  * type of government
  * parliament
  * political parties
  * head of state
* UK
  * type of government
  * parliament
  * political parties
  * head of state
* EU
  * when was eu created?
  * main idea of creating EU?
  * original members
  * istitutions of the EU
  * Schengen area


### Významná slovíčka:
* ambassador - velvyslanec 
* capital - hlavní město 
* compulsory - povinný 
* constitution - ústava 
* constitutional monarchy - konstituční monarchie 
* elect - volit 
* exectutive department - ministerstvo 
* goverment - vláda
* House of Commons - dolní sněmovna 
* House of Lords - horní sněmovna
* House of representatives - Sněmovna reprezentantů 
* Prime minister - premiér   

## Příklad řeči:
Czech Republic

CR is the a democratic state and government is divided into 3 powers that run the state. First is legislative power, represented by Parliament. Second is executive power, represented by the President. Last one is judicial, represented by various levels of courts.

Parliament is divided into two chambers. First is the CHAMBER OF DEPUTIES. 200 deputies every 4 years. Deputy must be older than 21. Second is the SENATE. 81 senators. Elections are every 2 years but every senator is elected for 6 years. Senator must be older than 40. Elections are public, secret, democratic, equal, direct and universal. Everybody ager 18 or more and who has Czech citizenship can vote.

In elections every senator or deputy is in political party. The most famous are ANO, ODS, Piráti. Leader of the winning party becomes the Prime Minister. Government is made of the Prime Minister, Vice-Premier and the minister and there are many ministries, like industry, justice, finance, transport and many more.

Judical power is divided into various levels. The most important are Constitutional Court and Supreme Court.

Our President (Miloš Zeman now) is elected by people every 5 years and he can be elected only 2 times in row. He is representing country. He appoints all ministers. He can refuse a bill or declare amnesty.

Most important national symbols are: National anthem – Kde domov můj, national flag – 3 colors, red at the bottom, white is at the top and blue is a triangle on the left side.

Great Britain

United Kingdom is a constitutional monarchy. UK consists of England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. British political system is headed by monarch (Queen Elizabeth II). Powers of the monarch are ceremonial. Parliament is divided into two Houses. First is the House of Commons and second is the House of Lords. Any new bill must pass through both Houses and after that it is sent to the Queen for the Royal Assent. 

Main functions of the UK parliament are to make and change laws, debate the important issues of the day, check and challenge the work of the Government and more.

Parliament is often called Westminster because it is housed in a building in central London called the Palace of Westminster.

The House of Commons is the lower chamber but the one with the most authority. The House of Commons has 650 Members of Parliament. They sit on long green covered benched and there is only seating capacity for 437 people. Elections to choose MPs take place every 5 years.  Every citizen over 18 can vote.

The House of Lords is upper chamber but the one with less authority. Main roles are to revise legislation and keep a check on Government. There is no fixed number of members in the House of Lords. 

British Government is formed by political party that has the majority in the Parliament and Queens appoints its leader as the Prime Minister. PM chooses about 20 ministers to form special advisory group called the Cabinet.

Today there are four major political parties in British parliamentary system – The Conservative Party, The Labour Party, The Scottish National Party, The Liberal Democrat Party

Current queen is Elizabeth II. She has been Queen of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand since 6 February 1952. As head of state, the Queen goes on official State visits abroad. She also invites other world leaders to come to the UK.

Important national symbols are: National flag that symbolises the Union of England, Scotland and Ireland. Each country has its cross in the flag. Britain national anthem is „God Save the Queen.

USA


USA is a federation of 50 states, governed by the President. 48 of 50 states are on the contitent, Alaska is in the North and Hawaii in the mid Pacific.

The constitution went into effect in March 1787. This document guarantees freedom of religion, free speech, the right for a fair trial and protection against cruel and unusual punishment. It was divided into 3 branches – legislative, executive and judical.

Legislative branch is made up of elected representatives. The Congress is divided into two parts: The House of Representatives and the Senate. The House of Representatives consists of about 450 lawmakers who are elected for 2 years. Senate has 100 – 2 for each state of the federation – who serve for 6 years. The main task of the Congress is to make federal laws.

Executive branch is represented by the President and 13 executive departments. He is elected every 4 years. The main tasks of President are: President proposes and vetoes bills, serves as the Commander in Chief of Armed Forces, sings treaties and appoints federals judges and ambassadors.

Judical branch is made up of Federal Districts Courts, 11 Federal Courts of Appeals and on the top the Supreme Court.

In USA there are two main political parties: Democratic party, which is more liberal, and the Republican Party, which puts more emphasis on private enterprise and individual initiative.

National flag consists of 50 white stars symbolising the 50 American states, and one larger oblong consisting of 6 white and 7 red stripes symbolising original 13 states. National anthem is called „The Star-Spangled Banner.

EU

Eu is a confederation of 27 countries in Europe. It started in 1957 as EEC – European Economic Community. It created a economic area in Europe – people are allowed to move and trade in other EU countries almost it was their own. 16 of them also share the same currency: Euro

Why was EU made? Some nations wanted to unite after second World War to prevent another war among them. First were France, Germany, Belgium, the Netherlands, Luxemburg and Italy. EU was established in 1992. CZ became a member in 2004. 

Main institution is: the European Parliament – has 785 member and the seat of the parliament is in Strassbourg and Brussels. Other are The Council of the EU, The European Central Bank and more.

Flag – 12 golden stars on blue background, stars in a circle symbolizes the idea of unity, solidarity and harmony among the people of Europe.

Original Members - Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,lreland, ltaly, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Portugal, the United Kingdom,Spain.

The Schengen area is the name given to the territory of the 26 European countries (Schengen Agreement countries, abbreviated as Schengen countries) in which persons can cross the borders of the contracting states at any point without going through border controls.

### Specific task: 
What ways is the EU coping with new trends in automation, robotic automation and artificial intelligence? Comment on these!

* Agriculture 4.0
* Triffid arm
* Eu goals

## Příklad řeči:
* Agriculture 4.0 - a farming management concept that takes advantage of new technologies and data collection
to increase yields and boost efficiency, to make farms work smarter not harder
* Project Triffid arm - To Help Deliver Internet Of Things
* The European Commission is currently exploring what measures and legislation are needed to realize the full 
the potential of AI while protecting EU citizens.
* 45%-60% of all workers in Europe could see themselves replaced by automation before 2030.