## Culture and the Arts. My Bookcase. My Favourite British or American Author

* What does the culture represent to society
  * Source of knowledge, education, experience, fun
  * Tradition
* Parts of culture
  * books
  * movies
  * music
  * philosophy and religions 
* My Bookcase
  * How often do I read
  * What books do I have 
  * Buy or borrow in a library
  * favorite genre 
  * favorite author
* My favorite Actor
  * Role model
  * His/her appearance
  * His/her movies


### Specific tast:
Name some modern devices that enable people to enjoy live cultural performances at home.

* Culture
* Culture during pandemy
* Radio
* TV
* Internet culture

### Ukradenej text od idk koho
* Culture - is the characteristics and knowledge of a particular groups of people. These groups we can in general divide according to states and their language, religion, cuisine, social habits, music and arts.
* Culture during pandemy - during the pandemy people are advised to stay at home and they can't experience cultural events as they used to be bcs mostly these events were cancelled or banned by governments. Bcs of the lack of cultural life many people nowadays have problem with a free time while being at home. Thats why there are televisions or the "new" internet culture. Still it isnt comparable to a live experience, basically you just sitting or do some housework and listening or watching tv or videos from the internet. 
* Radio - one of the older options is listening to the radio. Its technology based on radio waves. The first practical radio was developed in 1895. And began to be used commercially around 1900. From the point of view of history, Radio is one of the important discoveries. The biggest boom I thing radios had during world wars, where they were more efficient than letter delivery. Nowadays its still great source of news, weather reports, sports information and music.
* TV - Televisions were publicly used after WW2. Their advantage over the radio is the visual aspect, which affects people a lot more than just sound. Like the radio invention of television was a worldchanger. Now television has become  an axiom of the whole culture that everybody has at home. The evolution of television began with analog, then digital and now there are smart tvs with are hybrid between standard dialog tv and the internet. On television we can watch news, series, movies, music videos, shows on specific topics, documentaries. basically every aspect of the culture.
* Internet culture - the newest option is the internet culture. The biggest advantage is that, unlike television and radio, that you do not have to watch the program of the stations and you can simply search on your device with the internet connection and watch what you like (mostly pc, mobile phone or smart tv). You don't have to wait for the station to start broadcasting your favorite show. Another great advantage is social media, where you can share your ideas, opinions, favorite films, serials and images and you can discuss with other users.