## Shopping and Services

* what does shopping mean for other people
* specialized stores
* saving money while shopping
* marketplaces
* internet shopping X shopping centres
* second hands
* loans and leasing
* international/national brands

### Specific tast:
How to secure the proces of payment?

* Ways user can secure payment
* Ways developers of an app can secure payment
* How I pay on the internet
* Cryptocurrency
  
### Ukradenej text od idk koho  
* As a user. The most important part of securing payments is to not pay on unverified pages. It is also important to keep sensitive information safe like for example card PIN code. Another important part of a user’s safety paying is using the two-phase verification which will rapidly increase the security of payments. 
* There is also an importance of well-done job by developers of certain service especially on the security of saving the user’s data. It is very hard to create a functional and safe payment gateway that would be approved by the necessary authorities. That’s why most of the developers cooperate with some third-party service that is specialized in payments and is already approved.  
* When I pay on the internet I usually use a service called Google pay, which has saved my card information or I use my card by itself. I use two-phase verification which means, that except for writing card information, or just clicking on a card in Google pay I also have to write a code from SMS or confirm payment in the banking app.
* Another new and very interesting way to secure payments is to use modern cryptocurrencies like bitcoin. Bitcoin is especially powerful when we would like to stay anonymous. Thanks to blockchain technology that saves data of all transactions bitcoin can’t be stolen if an owner behaves responsibly. 
